---
title: "Late initialization"
header:
  image: https://images.pexels.com/photos/1056251/pexels-photo-1056251.jpeg
categories:
  - Tech
tags:
  - Kotlin
---

Sometimes, we want to initialize the properties of the class after it is created, but in a separate member function instead of using [`lazy`]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _posts/2022-05-26-lazy-initialisation.md %})

Let's take a look at below code. `Box` interface has a function `setUp` that initializes instances. Suppose we want to reuse a library that creates and manipulates `Box`. This library requires subclass initialization in `setUp()` instead of in a constructor.

```kotlin
interface Box {
  fun setUp()
}

class ToyBox: Box {
  private var items: String? = null
  override fun setUp() {
    items = "cars, trains, lego"
  }
  fun checkToy(toy: String): Boolean =
    items?.contains(toy) ?: false
}

val toyBox = ToyBox()
toyBox.setUp()
toyBox.checkToy("lego")
```

As you notice, in `ToyBox` class, we could not just define `items` as `String` because that would requires us to provide the initial value which is not `null`. We may be tempted to initialize with an empty `String`, but it is a bad practice because we will not know if empty is the real value of `items`. We use `null` to indicate that it has not yet initialized.

If we make `items` as optional (`String?`), it means we must check for `null` in all member functions, eg. in `checkToy()`, we have to make sure that `items` is not `null` before we could do `contains()` function call. However, we know in our mind that we will call `setUp()` function to initialize, so `null` check is unnecessary in reality.

The `lateinit` property fixes this problem. Let's take a look at the same code with `lateinit`.

```kotlin
interface Box {
  fun setUp()
}

class ToyBox: Box {
  lateinit var items: String? = null
  override fun setUp() {
    items = "cars, trains, lego"
  }
  fun checkToy(toy: String): Boolean =
    toy in items
}

val toyBox = ToyBox()
toyBox.setUp()
toyBox.checkToy("lego")
```

Now, the `checkToy()` does not need to worry if `items` is going to be `null` anymore. It is safely defined as non-nullable property.

### Limitation

`lateinit` could be used on a property inside the body of a class, a top-level property, or local `var`.

However,

- `lateinit` could only be used on `var` property, not a `val`.
- The property must be non-nullable type
- The property could not be a primitive type
- `lateinit` could not be used used in `abstract` class or `interface`
- `lateinit` is not allowed for custom `get()` or `set()`
- The IDE would not be able to detect if we forget to initialize or there will be no compile-time error

### Conclusion

The `lateinit` is a better way of expression in Kotlin if we are sure that the property will be initialized later by a function, and not by constructor. It converts the property into non-nullable, which has both benefits and pitfalls. Since we would not be able to detect it during compile time, the only time that we could find out is in runtime. `::items.isInitialized` might give some helps, we should take caution about it.
